[[sonatype-clm]]
== Sonatype CLM Integration

=== Introduction

As dicusssed in <<repoman>> Component Lifecycle Management (CLM) and
Repository Management are closed related activities. The Sonatype CLM
suite of tools provides a backend server for administrating your
component usage policies and other features that integrated with other
tools of the suite. Nexus is an important component that can take
advantage of the CLM server. This chapter goes into the details of
configuring and using the integration of the CLM server and Nexus. access


=== Connecting Nexus to CLM Server

The Sonatype CLM server is a separate server application that Nexus
integrates with via API calls. To configure Nexus to be able to contact
the CLM server, you need to click on the +CLM+ menu item in the left
hand +Administration+ menu in Nexus, which will open the tab visible
in <<fig-clm-config-tab>>.

[[fig-clm-config-tab]]
.CLM configuration tab in Nexus
image::figs/web/clm-config-tab.png[scale=60]

The CLM connection is established by providing the URL to the CLM
server in the +CLM Server URL+ input field.

Additional details can be configured in the +Properties+ input field
using a +key=value+ definition per line. An example is 

----
mail.systemEmail=clm-nexus@example.com
logging.level=INFO
----

These properties are passed to the CLM server. It is using the
http://dropwizard.codahale.com/[Dropwizard] Java framework and
therefore supports the
http://dropwizard.codahale.com/manual/core/#configuration[Configuration]
as visible in
https://github.com/codahale/dropwizard/blob/master/dropwizard-example/example.yml[the
Dropwizard example] as well as the config.yml shipped with the CLM
server installation bundle. In most cases you will not need to
configure any properties.

Press +Save+ once you have entered the desired URL and properties, and
Nexus will attempt to contact the CLM server and potentially display
an error message if the CLM serer could not be contacted.

=== Configuring the CLM Server

With the connection between the CLM Server and Nexus established, you
can configure any applications, application policies and constraints
as documented in the book "Optimized Component Lifecycle Management
with Sonatype CLM" available in
http://www.sonatype.com/books/sonatype-clm-book/pdf/sonatype-clm-book.pdf[PDF]
or http://www.sonatype.com/books/sonatype-clm-book/reference/[HTML
format].

=== Using CLM for Staging

To use the rich configuration of policies and rules of the CLM Server
for staging component releases in Nexus, you have to configure the
+Stage Release+ and +Release+ actions for each policy as desired.

An example policy that would warn for a staging deployment and fail a
release is visible in <<fig-clm-policy-staging>>

[[fig-clm-policy-staging]]
.Staging and Release Configuration for a Policy in the CLM Server
image::figs/web/clm-policy-staging.png[scale=60]

This configuration can then be used for a staging profile or a build
promotion profile by configuring the +CLM Application Id+ with the
identifier for the application in the CLM
server. <<fig-clm-staging-profile>> shows an example staging profile
with a CLM application configured.

[[fig-clm-staging-profile]]
.Staging Profile with a CLM Application Configured
image::figs/web/clm-staging-profile.png[scale=60]

The +Stage Release+ configuration is used for closing the a staging
repository. If it is set to Fail and a constraint is violated, the
staging repository closing fails. The +Release+ configuration to fail,
warn or do nothing is used for releasing the staging repository.

Once the staging profile is configured with the CLM Application Id any
deployment potentially triggers a CLM rule evaluation, which will be
visible as Activity for the staging repository. Any rule failures are
provided with further information in the detail panel. <<>> displays a
staging repository with CLM rule validations and a failure. The +View
Full Report+ buttons links back to the Sonatype CLM server, which
displays a detailed report.

[[fig-clm-staging-repository-failure]]
.Staging Repository Activity with a CLM Evaluation Failure and Details
image::figs/web/clm-staging-repository-failure.png[scale=60]




////
/* Local Variables: */
/* ispell-personal-dictionary: "ispell.dict" */
/* End:             */
////
