[[plugins]]
== Using Nexus Plugins

Nexus Open Source and Nexus Professional are built using a plugin
architecture, where Professional simply includes additional
plugins. Besides the default installed plugins you can install optional
plugins shipped with Nexus as well as plugins you or somebody else
created.
 
[[install-additional-plugins]]
=== Installing Additional Plugins

Optional plugins supplied by Sonatype can be found in the directory
+++$NEXUS_HOME/nexus/WEB-INF/optional-plugins+++. To install any of
these simply copy the folder containing the desired plugin into
+++$NEXUS_HOME/nexus/WEB-INF/plugin-repository+++. 

WARNING: When updating Nexus you will have to redo the install of any
optinal plugins using the newest version shipping with the download of
the new Nexus version. Any configuration of the plugin will be
preserved from one version to the other.

Plugins supplied by third parties like the
http://code.google.com/p/nexus-yum-plugin/[Nexus Yum Plugin] and
others, are installed by copying the folder with the plugin code into
+++sonatype-work/nexus/plugin-repository+++.

After a restart of Nexus the new plugins will be active and ready
to use. Upgrades are done by simply copying over the newer plugin and
removing the older one.

Plugins can be removed by deleting the respective folder in the
plugin-repository and restarting Nexus.

[[nexus-outreach-plugin]]
=== Nexus Outreach Plugin

The Nexus Outreach Plugin is installed by default in Nexus Open Source
and Nexus Professional. It allocates space in the user
interface left navigation and welcome page for linking to further
documentation and support resources. This data is retrieved from Sonatype
servers.

In a case where this outgoing traffic from your Nexus instance or the
resulting documentation and links are not desired, the plugin can be
disabled. The plugin can be disabled by disabling the advanced
'Outreach : Management' capability in the Capabilities section found
in the Administration left hand navigation menu.

You can safely remove the plugin as well without any other negative side effects. To do so
simply remove the 'nexus-outreach-plugin-X.Y.Z' folder in
'$NEXUS_HOME/nexus/WEB-INF/plugin-repository/' and restart your Nexus
instance.

[[custom-metadata-plugin]]
=== Custom Metadata Plugin

The custom metadata plugin is an optional plugin that comes as part of
any Nexus download. It allows you to view, edit and search for
additional metadata about any artifact in your Nexus repositories.

The directory containing the plugin code is called
nexus-custom-metadata-plugin-X.Y.Z. Install the plugin following the
instructions in <<install-additional-plugins>>.

==== Viewing Artifact Metadata

The Custom Metadata Plugin gives you the ability to view artifact
metadata. When browsing repository storage or a repository index,
clicking on an artifact will load the Artifact Information panel.
Selecting the Artifact Metadata tab will display the interface shown
in <<fig-using-viewing-metadata>>.

[[fig-using-viewing-metadata]]
.Viewing Artifact Metadata
image::figs/web/meta_existing-meta-value.png[scale=60]

Artifact metadata consists of a key, a value, and a namespace.
Existing metadata from an artifact's POM is given a urn:maven
namespace, and custom attributes are stored under the urn:nexus/user
namespace.

==== Editing Artifact Metadata

The Custom Metadata Plugin gives you the ability to add custom
attributes to artifact metadata. To add a custom attribute, click on
an artifact in Nexus, and select the Artifact Metadata tab. On the
Artifact Metadata tab, click on the Add... button and a new row will
be inserted into the list of attributes. Supply a key and value and
click the Save button to update an artifact's
metadata. <<fig-using-editing-metadata>> shows the Artifact Metadata
panel with two custom attributes: "approvedBy" and "approved".

[[fig-using-editing-metadata]]
.Editing Artifact Metadata
image::figs/web/meta_setting-meta-value.png[scale=60]

==== Searching Artifact Metadata

The Custom Metadata Plugin provides you with the ability to configure
custom artifact metadata and search for artifacts with specific
metadata. To search for artifacts using metadata, click on the
Advanced Search link directly below the search field in the Nexus
application menu to open the Search panel. Once in the search panel,
click on the Keyword Search and click on Metadata Search in the search
type drop-down as shown in <<fig-using-search-metadata>>.

[[fig-using-search-metadata]]
.Searching Artifact Metadata
image::figs/web/meta_search-selection.png[scale=60]

Once you select the Metadata Search you will see two search fields and
an operator drop-down. The two search fields are the key and value of
the metadata you are searching for. The key corresponds to the key of
the metadata you are searching for, and the value contains the value
or value range you are searching for. The operator drop-down can be set
to Equals, Matches, Bounded, or Not Equal.

.Metadata Search Results for Custom Metadata
image::figs/web/meta_search-function.png[scale=60]

Once you locate a matching artifact in the Metadata Search interface,
click on the artifact and then select the Artifact Metadata to examine
an artifacts metadata as shown in <<fig-using-search-metadata-results>>.

[[fig-using-search-metadata-results]]
.Metadata Search Results for Custom Metadata
image::figs/web/meta_search-result-0.png[scale=60]


[[user-account]]
=== User Account Plugin

Nexus Professional's User Account Plugin allows anonymous users to
sign-up for a Nexus account without administrative intervention.  This
"self-serve" capability for user account creation is especially
important when an open source project is using Nexus as a primary
means for distribution. In such an environment, there may be hundreds
of Nexus users who all need a basic level of read-only access, and
making these users wait for an administrator to create an account
makes little sense. In such a setting, anyone can create an account,
activate the account via a verification email, and then access a
repository with a default level of access you can
define.

[[user-account-sect-installation]]
==== Installing the User Account Plugin

The user account plugin is an optional plugin that comes as part of the
Nexus Professional download. The directory containing the plugin code is called
nexus-user-account-plugin-X.Y.Z. Install the plugin following the
instructions in <<install-additional-plugins>>.
 
[[user-account-sect-configuring]]
==== Configuring the User Account Plugin

After a restart of Nexus the installed plugin will be available for
use but still be deactivated.  To configure the User Account Plugin,
click on Server under the Administration section of the Nexus menu,
and scroll down to the section named "User Sign Up". The User Sign Up
section is shown in <<fig-user-account-user-sign-up-preference>>.

[[fig-user-account-user-sign-up-preference]]
.Configuring the User Account Plugin
image::figs/web/user-account_user-sign-up-preference.png[scale=60]

To activate the User Sign Up feature, set the "User Sign Up" feature
to "On". This will expose a "Sign Up" link next to the "Log In" link
in the Nexus user interface. The Selected Roles in this configuration
section are the default roles assigned to users who successfully
signed up for an account.

In addition it is necessary for the anonymous user to have the role
"UI: User Account Sign Up" assigned. This should be automatically
configured during the plugin install. You can use the Role Tree tab for
the anonymous user to inspect if that is correctly configured, and if
necessary add the role

[[user-account-sect-sign-up]]
==== Signing Up for an Account

Once User Sign Up has been activated via the Server settings as shown
in <<user-account-sect-configuring>>, users will see a Sign Up link
next to the Log In link in the top right hand corner of the Nexus
interface. Clicking on this Sign Up link will display the Nexus Sign
Up dialog shown in <<fig-user-account-sign-up-form>>. This form
accepts a username, password, the first and last name of the new user,
and an email account. It also asks the users to type in some text from
a captcha form element. If a user cannot read the text in the captcha,
they can click on the captcha to refresh it with new text.

[[fig-user-account-sign-up-form]]
.Nexus Sign Up Form
image::figs/web/user-account_sign-up-form.png[scale=60]

Once the new user clicks on the Sign Up button, they will receive a
confirmation dialog which instructs them to check for an activation
email.

[[fig-user-account-sign-up-confirm]]
.Nexus Sign Up Confirmation
image::figs/web/user-account_sign-up-succeed.png[scale=60]

The user will then receive an email containing an activation
link. 

WARNING: The SMTP settings in your Nexus Server configuration need to
be set up for the activation email to be sent successfully.

When a user signs up for a Nexus account, the newly created
account is disabled until they click on the activation link contained
in this email. A sample of the activation email is shown in <<fig-user-account-activation-email>>.

[[fig-user-account-activation-email]]
.Nexus Activation Email
image::figs/web/user-account_activation-email.png[scale=50]

Upon successful login from the activation email link, the user will be
directed to the Summary panel of the users Profile.

NOTE: The example activation email in <<fig-user-account-activation-email>>, points to
localhost:8081. You can change this URL by changing the Base URL
setting in the Application Server Settings section of the Server
configuration.  To change this setting, click on the Server link under
Administration in the Nexus menu.

[[user-account-sect-manual-activate]]
==== Manual Activation of New Users

If a user does not receive the activation email after signing up for a
new account, an Administrator may need to manually activate a new
user. To do this, go to the list of Nexus users by clicking on the
Users link under Security in the Nexus menu. Locate and select the new
user in the list of Nexus users, and change the Status from Disabled
to Enabled as shown in <<fig-user-account-activation>>.

[[fig-user-account-activation]]
.Manually Activating a Signed Up User
image::figs/web/user-account_sign-up-admin-activate.png[scale=60]

[[user-account-sect-default-user]]
==== Modifying Default User Permissions

The default user permissions in the User Sign Up feature only includes
"UI: Base UI Privileges". If a user signs up with just this simple
permission, the only thing they will be able to do is login, change
their password, and logout. <<fig-user-account-base-ui>>, shows the
interface a user would see after logging in with only the base UI
privileges.

[[fig-user-account-base-ui]]
.User Interface with only the Base UI Privileges
image::figs/web/user-account_sign-up-default-permissions.png[scale=20]

To provide some sensible default permissions, click on the Server
under the Administration section of the Nexus menu and scroll down to
the User Sign Up section of the Server settings. Make sure that the
selected default roles for new users contain some ability to browse,
search, and view repositories.

[[fig-user-account-default-roles]]
.Selecting Default Roles for New Users
image::figs/web/user-account_sign-up-more-default-permissions.png[scale=60]

WARNING: <<fig-user-account-default-roles>> shows a
default User Sign Up role containing the Nexus Deployment Role. If
your server were available to the public this wouldn't be a wise
default role as it would allow anyone to sign up for an account,
activate an account, and start publishing artifacts to hosted
repositories with little or no oversight. Such a default role may only
make sense if you are running an internal, corporate instance of Nexus
Professional and you are comfortable granting any developer in the
organization deployment permissions.

[[crowd]]
=== Nexus Atlassian Crowd Plugin

Atlassian's Crowd is a single sign-on and identity management product
that many organizations use to consolidate user accounts and control
which users and groups have access to which applications. Nexus
Professional contains an optional security plugin that allows you to
configure Nexus to authenticate against an Atlassian Crowd
instance. For more information about Atlassian Crowd, go to
http://www.atlassian.com/software/crowd/

[[crowd-sect-installation]]
==== Installing the Crowd Plugin

The Nexus Atlassian Crowd plugin is an otional plugin that comes as part of any
Nexus Professional download. The directory containing the plugin code
is called enterprise-crowd-plugin-X.Y.Z. Install the plugin following
the instructions in <<install-additional-plugins>>.
 
[[crowd-sect-config]]
==== Configuring the Crowd Plugin

Once the Atlassian Crowd plugin is installed, restart Nexus and login
as a user with Administrative privileges. To configure the Crowd
plugin, click on the Crowd Configuration in the Security section of
the Nexus menu as shown in <<fig-crowd-menu-link>>.

[[fig-crowd-menu-link]]
.Crowd Menu Link in the Security Section of the Nexus Menu
image::figs/web/crowd_menu-link.png[scale=60]

Clicking on the Crowd Configuration link will load the form shown in
<<fig-crowd-config>>. This configuration panel contains
all of the options that need to be configured to connect your Nexus
instance to Crowd for authorization and authentication.

[[fig-crowd-config]]
.Crowd Configuration Panel
image::figs/web/crowd_server-config.png[scale=60]

The following sections outline all of the settings in the Crowd
Configuration Pane.

[[crowd-sect-access]]
==== Crowd Access Settings

The Access Settings section of the Crowd configuration is shown in
<<fig-crowd-access-settings>>. This section contains
the following fields:

Application Name:: This field contains the application name of a Crowd
application. This value should match the value in the Name field of
the form shown in <<fig-crowd-app>>.

Application Password:: This field contains the application password of
a Crowd application. This value should match the value in the Password
field of the form shown in <<fig-crowd-app>>.

Crowd Server URL:: This is the URL of the Crowd Server, this URL
should be accessible to the Nexus process as it is the URL that Nexus
will use to connect to Crowd's SOAP services.

Authentication Interval:: This is the number of minutes that a Crowd
authentication is valid for. This value is in units of minutes, and a
value of 30 means that Nexus will only require re-authentication if
more than 30 minutes have elapsed since a previously authenticated
user has accessed Nexus.

Use Groups:: If clicked, Use Groups allows Nexus to use Crowd Groups
when calculating Nexus Roles. When selected, you can map a Nexus Role
to a Crowd Group.

[[fig-crowd-access-settings]]
.Crowd Access Settings
image::figs/web/crowd_server-config-access-settings.png[scale=60]

===== Crowd HTTP Settings

You can control the concurrency of connections to Crowd in the HTTP
Settings section shown in <<fig-crowd-http-settings>>. If you have a
high-traffic instance of Nexus, you will want to limit the number of
simultaneous connections to the Crowd server to a reasonable value
like 20. The HTTP Timeout specifies the number of milliseconds Nexus
will wait for a response from Crowd. A value of zero for either of
these properties indicates that there is no limit to either the number
of connections or the timeout.

[[fig-crowd-http-settings]]
.Crowd HTTP Settings
image::figs/web/crowd_server-config-http-settings.png[scale=60]

===== Crowd HTTP Proxy Settings

If your Nexus installation is connecting to Crowd via an HTTP Proxy
server, the HTTP Proxy Settings section of the Crowd Configuration
allows you to specify the host, port, and credentials for a HTTP Proxy
server. The HTTP Proxy Settings section is shown in <<fig-crowd-http-proxy>>.

[[fig-crowd-http-proxy]]
.Crowd HTTP Proxy Settings
image::figs/web/crowd_server-config-http-proxy.png[scale=60]

===== Miscellaneous Settings

The miscellaneous settings section shown in
<<fig-crowd-misc-settings>>, allows you to configure settings that
control the name of the Single Sign-on cookie and the various keys
that are used to retrieve values that relate to authentication and the
auth token. This dialog is only relevant if you have modified optional
Crowd settings in your $CROWD_HOME/etc/crowd.properties. For more
information about customizing these options see the
http://confluence.atlassian.com/display/CROWD/The+crowd.properties+File[Atlassian
Crowd documentation]

[[fig-crowd-misc-settings]]
.Crowd Miscellaneous Settings
image::figs/web/crowd_server-config-misc.png[scale=60]

[[crowd-sect-auth-realm]]
==== Adding the Crowd Authentication Realm

Once you have configured Nexus to connect to Crowd, you must select
the Crowd authorization realm from the list of available realms in
your Nexus Server settings. <<fig-crowd-activate-realm>>, shows the
Security settings section in the Nexus Server
configuration. To load the Nexus server configuration panel, click on
Server under Administration in the Nexus menu. Drag Crowd from the
list of available realms to the list of selected realms and then save
the Nexus server configuration.

[[fig-crowd-activate-realm]]
.Configuring the Crowd Authentication Realm
image::figs/web/crowd_activate-realm.png[scale=60]

[[crowd-sect-nx]]
==== Configuring a Nexus Application in Crowd

To connect Nexus to Atlassian's Crowd, you will need to configure
Nexus as an application in Crowd. To do this, login to Crowd as a user
with Administrative rights, and click on the Applications tab. Once
you click on this tab, you should see two options under the
Applications tab: Search Applications and Add Application. Click on
Add Application to display the form shown in <<fig-crowd-app>>, and
create a new application with the following values in the Details tab
of the Add Application form:

* Application Type: Generic Application

* Name: nexus

* Description: Sonatype Nexus Professional

Choose a password for this application. Nexus will use this password
to authenticate with the Crowd server. Click on the Next button.

[[fig-crowd-app]]
.Creating a Nexus Crowd Application
image::figs/web/crowd_new-app.png[scale=60]

Clicking on Next will advance the form to the Connection tab shown in
<<fig-crowd-app-connection>>. In this tab you need to supply the URL
Nexus and the remote IP address for
Nexus. <<fig-crowd-app-connection>>, shows the Connection form
configured for a local instance of Nexus. If you were configuring
Crowd and Nexus in a production environment, you would supply the URL
that users would use to load Nexus in a web browser and you would
supply the IP address that Nexus will be connecting from. Once you
have completed the Connection form, click on Next to advance to the
Directories form.

[[fig-crowd-app-connection]]
.Creating a Nexus Crowd Application Connection
image::figs/web/crowd_new-app-connection.png[scale=60]

Clicking on Next advances to the Directories form shown in
<<fig-crowd-app-directories>>.  In this example, the Nexus application
in Crowd is going to use the default "User Management"
directory. Click on the Next button to advance to the "Authorisation"
form.

[[fig-crowd-app-directories]]
.Creating a Nexus Crowd Application Directories
image::figs/web/crowd_new-app-directories.png[scale=60]

Clicking on the Next button advances to the "Authorisation" form shown
in <<fig-crowd-app-authorization>>. If any of the
directories selected in the previous form contain groups, each group
is displayed on this form next to a checkbox. You can select "Allow
all users" for a directory, or you can select specific groups which
are allowed to authenticate to Crowd through Nexus. This option would
be used if you wanted to limit Nexus access to specific subgroups
within a larger Crowd directory. If your entire organization is stored
in a single Crowd directory, you may want to limit Nexus access to a
group that contains only Developers and Administrators.

[[fig-crowd-app-authorization]]
.Creating a Nexus Crowd Application Authorization
image::figs/web/crowd_new-app-authorization.png[scale=60]

[[crowd-sect-mapping]]
==== Mapping Crowd Groups to Nexus Roles

To map a Crowd Group to a Nexus Role, open up the Roles panel by
clicking on the Roles link under the Security section of the Nexus
menu. Click on the Add... button and select External Role Mapping as
shown in <<fig-crowd-add-ext-role-map>>.

[[fig-crowd-add-ext-role-map]]
.Adding an External Role Mapping
image::figs/web/crowd_add-ext-role-map.png[scale=60]

Selecting External Role Mapping will show the Map External Role dialog
shown in <<fig-crowd-map-ext-role>>.

[[fig-crowd-map-ext-role]]
.Mapping an External Crowd Group to a Nexus Role
image::figs/web/crowd_map-ext-role.png[scale=60]

Once you have mapped a Crowd Group to a Nexus Role, these Roles will
appear in the list of Nexus Roles with a mapping value of "Crowd" as
shown in <<fig-crowd-mapped-rules" os=">>.

[[fig-crowd-mapped-rules]]
.Two Crowd Groups Mapped to Nexus Roles
image::figs/web/crowd_mapped-roles.png[scale=60]

[[crowd-sect-role]]
==== Adding a Crowd Role to a Nexus User

To illustrate this feature, consider the crowd-manager user with an id
of "brian". This user's groups are shown in
<<fig-crowd-view-user-groups-brian>>.

[[fig-crowd-view-user-groups-brian]]
.Crowd Groups for User "brian"
image::figs/web/crowd_view-user-groups-brian.png[scale=60]

To add an external user role mapping, open up the Users panel by
clicking on Users in the Security section of the Nexus panel. Click on
the Add... button and select External User Role Mapping from the
drop-down as shown in <<fig-crowd-add-ext-user-role-map>>.

[[fig-crowd-add-ext-user-role-map]]
.Adding an External User Role Mapping
image::figs/web/crowd_add-ext-user-role-map.png[scale=60]

Selecting External User Role Mapping will show the dialog shown in
<<fig-crowd-find-external-user" os=">>.

[[fig-crowd-find-external-user]]
.Locating a Crowd User in the User Role Mapping Dialog
image::figs/web/crowd_find-external-user.png[scale=60]

Once you locate the Crowd user that you want to add a Nexus Role
to... You can use the configuration panel shown in
<<fig-crowd-assign-user-role>>, to add a Role to the Crowd-managed
"brian" user.

[[fig-crowd-assign-user-role]]
.Adding a Nexus Role to a Crowd User
image::figs/web/crowd_assign-user-role.png[scale=60]

[[nexus-branding-plugin]]
=== Nexus Branding Plugin

The branding plugin is an optional plugin that comes as part of Nexus
Professional. It features the possibility to brand your Nexus instance
by replacing the default Sonatype Nexus logo with your logo (or an
image of your choice).

The new logo needs to be a PNG image. To blend in well in the UI, it
is recommended that it is of 60 pixels height and has a transparent
background.

By default, the branding plugin will look for the new logo in a file
called 

----
sonatype-work/nexus/conf/branding.png
-----

However, it is possible to configure this path by adding a
branding.image.path property to the 'nexus.properties' file in 
'$NEXUS_HOME/conf/':

----
branding.image.path=/data/images/nexus_logo.png
----

If it fails to find a new logo, the plugin will fall back to using
the default Sonatype Nexus logo.

////
/* Local Variables: */
/* ispell-personal-dictionary: "ispell.dict" */
/* End:             */
////
